to discuss all these developments in
Gaza and elsewhere let's now speak to
Ali Akbar salahi who's the former
Iranian foreign minister is joining us
here on the newsour on Al jaaz Mr SEI
thank you so much for your time thank
you for coming into alzer at this
dangerous time for the region how does
Iran view this war on Gaza and does it
see itself playing a role directly or
indirectly well this is no secret that
Iran has always supported
the uh group like the Hamas group and
the Jihadi group The Resistance group as
a as a whole and we have supported them
in many ways uh especially in um you
know mainly in terms of educating them
how to enter into crisis such as the
crisis that they have had so far
but uh this is as far as we have gone
yeah you've supported them in many ways
was their support on October the 7th
excuse me was their support on October
the 7th on the attack Hamas conducted we
were not because they take their
decision on their own but uh this does
not mean that we don't support them we
have always said this we have said it
loudly that we support the resistance
group but they are independent in taking
their own decisions because uh as is the
case with his for example in Lebanon we
have absolutely
no for example no voice on making the
decision that they want to make right
because in the west Hezbollah is widely
seen as being uh supported by Iran of
course and uh is widely seen as being
controlled by Iran you're saying that's
not the case it is supported by Iran but
it is not controlled by Iran that's what
I'm trying to say hisbah is a group that
is matured enough that can make its own
decision very discreetly and it can make
its own decision based on rationality
and wisdom and that has been uh utterly
said by Mr nasah that Iran has nothing
to do with the decisions that are made
by the Hamas group or the hasbullah
group yes we support them morally we
support them morally and U in other ways
also we support them probably in
teaching them the U the art of combat
for example but this is as far as we go
okay so then when you see the tensions
along the Israel Lebanon border right
now we've seen escalation in the last
few weeks since the October uh 7eventh
war on Gaza began Hezbollah you say you
support Iran support their allies what
is the message Iran today is sending to
Hezbollah is advising Hezbollah is it to
deescalate contain the situation along
that Israel Lebanon border well what
Iran wishes is that this war crime the
atrocities that is being played by the
Israelis against the poor people of Gaza
to stop okay and uh but Iran is not as
it has uttered many times it has said
many times uh that Iran has nothing to
do with the decision that has been made
by Hamas okay but we support them all
along and we add our voice to the voices
of others people of conscience all
around the world who have gone who have
come out to the streets and shouting
against the Israeli
brutality and uh the unprecedented
brutality that Israel has really uh
putting uh I mean
um
playing against the Gaza people we have
said it very utterly that uh we hope
that this uh conflict stops right and
that the people of Gaza are given the
chance of living like any other people
in the world right let me just pick up
on Hezbollah once again what is Tan's
advice to Hezbollah today is it to
deescalate the the situation along the
Israel border is it to contain it
because Iran's security and interests
are also at risk here aren't they well
as I said you see we have no I mean Iran
as it as Iran per se has nothing to do
with this conflict which is going on
although we support the uh the U the
Palestinian views we support the
Palestinian decisions whatever decision
they make but uh we have have absolutely
no voice here in order to tell them what
to do and what not to do so no voice
either with the huies in in Yemen for
example they fired a number of towards
Israel no no okay we have said this and
everybody knows that I mean the hthis
andah and the Hamas they are matured
enough to make their own decisions
because making decisions in such very uh
sensitive uh moments it's not an easy
thing to do so it is them to make an
appraisal of the situation and then make
the right decision okay let's move away
Mr SEI and discuss the relationship now
with with Washington with the US which I
think it's fair to describe it as a
Tense one Iran's relationship with the
United States the US in recent days has
targeted sites in Syria which is says
are links to Iran uh and to the
Revolutionary guards it's accused Iran
and its allies of of attacking US troops
in the region what what do you respond
to that well I mean it is the same
reasoning when the United States has no
reason I mean it has no justification
for its presence in the region and when
the United States supports all the
criminal acts of the Israeli regime
against the deprived people of Gaza so
they are looking for all kinds of
justifications uh
that has no value for us and so they
keep on saying that okay we have
attacked Iranians in Syria okay we what
do we have in Syria we have advisors in
Syria so when they say they have
attacked places in Syria that belongs to
Iran that is not true I mean our
military presence in Syria is based upon
invitation by the government of Syria
and it is mainly an advisory role that
Iran is playing in Syria so I don't know
what America where are they bombarding
so it is up to them to decide wherever
they want to bombard but this doesn't
mean that it is an Iranian foothold that
they are bombarding that you you talk
about the US presence in the region Mr
CI and and there's a report in Al
monitor newspaper which says that Iran
is hoping to use this war on Gaza to
force the Americans the US military out
of the region and will do this by using
Pro its allies the pro Iranian militias
and so on what do you respond to that
well we have said this many times we are
not shy of saying it we we want the US
to be out of this region what does us
have to do in this region and they are
thousands of miles away from this region
imagine if Iran is near the US border
what do they how do they uh react to
that so the same what's prepar to do
then to see the US move out of the
region excuse me what is Iran prepared
to do to see the US leave the region
well um Iran does its best but in a way
using its rationality and wisdom we do
not uh really sort of uh put ourselves
in a
situation that would end up uh in
confrontation okay that is for sure but
of course that does not mean that we do
not keep our diplomatic pressure so
there are many ways of putting pressure
on the US to leave the region one of
them is diplomatic pressure and then uh
um coordination with the uh resistance
groups in the region so that they will
see that for sure that the US will have
to leave this place well but there's
been a huge buildup o of US military
hardware in the region since the war on
Gaza this latest one began on October
the 7th and that's worrying a lot of
people a lot of people are concerned
that there could be a spill over and
that we could see a regional conflict is
that something that concerns you how
high is the risk of Confrontation today
of course we do all our best so that
this crisis will not to spill over we
don't want to see any
confrontation with uh so that this
crisis will SP and we have said it many
times our foreign minister has said it
our president has said it that we wish
that the isra ISIS come to their um
senses and that they stop this
atrocities against the gazan people and
so that crisis will stop but if they
insist because I think the Israelis want
to transfer the crisis from inside
Israel to outside Israel this is what
they wish because Israel is
now the whole country so-called country
I mean we are not recognizing of course
Israel but the people in Israel are all
out of job and work Israel is not
functioning anymore it is engaged with
the war with in Gaza so um um we hope
that this does not spill over but they
are trying their utmost to really
transfer this crisis to outside Israel
so that's why they are uh raising the
crisis in uh in southern Lebanon for
example and uh they are trying to get
Hezbollah involved more in this crisis
right but of course hisbah and others
know what to do and uh they uh certainly
make the decisions as I said very
discreetly and uh very rationally and
using their own wisdom they make an
appraisal of the situation I mean they
so it is not you see the Israelis have
come to their senses and to their
understanding that the other side is
really uh a side that uh
does makes its move based on all kinds
of calculations right uh so they they
move very cautiously but very steadily
and they know what they are doing so you
you believe that a a spillover should be
avoided uh in the region I wanted to ask
ask you about Saudi Arabia uh and Arab
Unity Unity among Islamic countries and
and uh the Arab world there was a
conference uh in uh Riyad a few days ago
where we saw Arab leaders Express Unity
with uh Palestinians in Gaza called for
a ceasefire the Saudis before the start
of this conflict there was talk that
Saudi Arabia and Israel were towards a
path to normalized relations there's
been a rosma in in recent months between
Iran and Saudi Arabia as well we saw the
Iranian president in Riad at the summit
actually which was quite significant how
does Iran I mean the normalization Talks
Of course have been sold for now but it
doesn't necessarily mean that they're
off the table how does Iran view that
right now the the the unity among
leaders of this region when it comes to
the Palestinian cause I think after the
Gaza crisis this normalization Pro uh
process will not to the best of my U
understanding will not move as it was
before it will it is certainly has been
installed and so probably it is not very
easy to continue with the same pace and
with the same rate and uh the process of
normalization so I think the Awakening
of the public opinion the Arab public
opinion after the crisis uh Gaza crisis
will put pressure on the governments in
Arab states so that to think twice
before they normalize their relations
with Israel because they certainly don't
seem to be on the same page when it
comes to what action to take to to
achieve a ceasefire in Gaza for example
as we saw in yes now we are on the same
phase of course we are on the same page
and uh so we all ask for a ceasefire in
Gaza now uh this is in the interest of
the region in the interest of the Gaza
people and um
well I think one thing is that uh
Israelis have lost their
rationality and they are committing
mistakes after mistakes and certainly as
the war
continues that will be in the interest
of the Arab world and the Muslim world
because the more the conscience the more
more the public opinion of the people in
the Islamic world will understand the
reality and the essence and the nature
of the Israeli regime then it would be
better to really from then on to come up
with all kinds of uh uh reasoning as to
why resistance should exist and should
expand because they are occupiers they
have to leave the Palestinian land we
have all these uh un uh resolutions
which says so and we have the the Arab
people and the Muslim people that would
like to see so so we hope uh that at the
end of the day and we are sure about
this that at the end of the day it is
the people who wins not the governments
it is the now the burden of the conflict
is on the shoulders of the people and
not on the shoulders of the government
no Arab government government is
involved now in this crisis it is the
people who are carrying out this the
pressure of this crisis and people never
lose Mr SEI thank you so very much for
joining us on aler thank you for sharing
your views with us Ali Akbar SEI is the
former Iranian foreign minister joining
us here on the newsour on aler thank you
very much for your time we appreciate it